Add an article about passkeys UX at Google (#10266)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/identity/passkey-google-ux/index.md

---
layout: post
title: Designing the user experience of passkeys on Google accounts

> subhead: Learn how Google designed the user experience of passkeys for Google accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subhead: Bringing better security and a better user experience to Google accounts.
```

authors:
  - mitchgalavan
  - cjacinic
  - silviaconvento

> date: 2023-07-27

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-07-26
```

hero: image/YLflGBAPWecgtKJLqCJHSzHqe2J2/y1JgqDiKp5XDnXFjiv7M.png
description: |

>   Passkeys make a website's user accounts safer, simpler, easier to use and passwordless. This article discusses Google designed the user experience of passkeys for Google accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Passkeys make user accounts safer, simpler, and easier to use. This article explains Google designed the user experience of passkeys for Google accounts.
```

authentication process: ease of use and security.

### Leading with convenience 

<figure>
{% Img
  src="image/YLflGBAPWecgtKJLqCJHSzHqe2J2/UI5EioUkpDiMtUAdARnw.png",
  alt="For most users, this will be the first time they see passkeys", width="800", height="600" %}
  <figcaption>For most users, this will be the first time they see passkeys</figcaption>
</figure>

The first passkey screen users see is light and easy-to-digest.  The header is
focusing on the user benefit, saying "Simplify your sign in."

The body copy explains "With passkeys you can now use your fingerprint, face or
screen lock to verify it's really you".

The illustration is intended to ground the message in the value proposition made
by the page. The large blue primary action invites the user to proceed. "Not
now" is included as a secondary action to allow users to choose whether or not
to opt in at this time, leaving the user in control. And "Learn more" is offered
for the most curious users who would like to understand passkeys better before
proceeding. 

We explored many iterations of the pages used to introduce users to passkeys
during sign in. This included trying content that emphasized the security,

> technology, and other aspects of passkeys  - yet convenience was really what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
technology, and other aspects of passkeys—yet convenience was really what
```

encourages making it your own with customizations.

Passkeys icon is shown consistently across the user journey to create a
familiarity with what the user will see when using or managing the passkey. The
passkey icon is never presented without context or supporting material.

<figure>
{% Img
  src="image/YLflGBAPWecgtKJLqCJHSzHqe2J2/kPbCZqaBDx5AFTZyi54a.png",
  alt="When users create their passkey, they'll see this page", width="800", height="600" %}
  <figcaption>When users create their passkey, they'll see this page</figcaption>
</figure>

Above, we outlined how the user and the platform work together to create a
passkey. When the user clicks "Continue" they'll be presented with a unique UI
depending on the platform. 

With that in mind, we learned through internal research that a confirmation
screen once the passkey is created can be very helpful in terms of comprehension
and closure at this step of the process.

<figure>
{% Img
  src="image/YLflGBAPWecgtKJLqCJHSzHqe2J2/sNqODRG8qqaGQc8ygbjO.png",
  alt="Once the passkey has been created, users will see this page", width="800", height="600" %}

>   <figcaption>Once the passkey has been created, users will see this page</figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption>Once the passkey has been created, users will see this page.</figcaption>
```

</figure>

The confirmation screen is a deliberate ‘pause' to bookend the journey of
introducing a user to passkeys and going through the process of creating one of
their own. As it is (likely) the first time a user has engaged with passkeys,
this page aims to provide clear closure to the journey. We chose a standalone
page after trying some other tools like smaller notifications, and even a
post-creation email–simply to provide a structured, stable end to end
experience. 

Once the user clicks "Continue" here, they're brought to their destination. 

<figure>
{% Img
  src="image/YLflGBAPWecgtKJLqCJHSzHqe2J2/u7ugXsWYbGcylhCWZ21M.png",
  alt="When users sign in again, they'll likely see this page", width="800", height="600" %}

>   <figcaption>When users sign in again, they'll likely see this page</figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption>When users sign in again, they'll likely see this page.</figcaption>
```

</figure>

## Signing in

Next time a user tries to sign in, they'll be greeted with this page. This uses
the same layout, illustration, and primary call to action to evoke the first
‘creation' experience outlined above. Once the user has made a choice to enroll
in passkeys, this page should feel familiar and they will recognize what steps
they need to take to sign in.

<figure>
{% Img
  src="image/YLflGBAPWecgtKJLqCJHSzHqe2J2/kPbCZqaBDx5AFTZyi54a.png",
  alt="The user will use this WebAuthn UI to sign in", width="800", height="600" %}

>   <figcaption>The user will use this WebAuthn UI to sign in</figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption>The user will use this WebAuthn UI to sign in.</figcaption>
```

</figure>

The same principle of familiarity applies here. Intentionally, this uses the
same iconography, illustration, layout and text. The text within the WebAuthn UI
is kept brief, broad, and re-usable–so everyone can use this both for
authentication and reauthentication.

## Passkeys management

Introducing a whole new page within the Google Account settings pages required
careful consideration to ensure a cohesive, intuitive, and consistent user
experience.

To achieve this, we analyzed the patterns regarding navigation, content,
hierarchy, structure, and established expectations that existed across the
Google Account.

<figure>
{% Img
  src="image/YLflGBAPWecgtKJLqCJHSzHqe2J2/C0xuS6j8vd98Y17jckE3.png",
  alt="Passkeys management page in the Google Account", width="800", height="655"
%}

>   <figcaption>Passkeys management page in the Google Account</figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption>Passkeys management page in the Google Account.</figcaption>
```

hardware security
keys](https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/13548313?hl=en&sjid=17510595681178318776-NA)).

### Providing additional content 

Internal research showed that using passkeys is a relatively seamless and
familiar experience. However as with any new technology, there are lingering
questions and concerns that will come up for some users.

How the technology works behind the screen lock, what makes it more secure, and
the most common "what if" scenarios Google came across in testing are addressed
in [Google's passkey Help Center
content](https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/13548313?hl=en&sjid=17510595681178318776-NA).
Having support content ready with launch of passkeys is critical for an easy
transition for users on any site.

### Falling back from passkeys 

Reverting to the old system is as simple as clicking "try another way" when a
user is asked to authenticate with a passkey. Additionally, exiting the WebAuthn
UI will start users on a path to try their passkey again, or sign into their
Google Account in traditional ways. 

## Conclusion

We are still in the early days of passkeys, so when designing the user
experience keep a few principles in mind:

> * Introduce passkeys when it's relevant to the user    
> * Highlight the benefits of passkeys
> * Use opportunities to build familiarity the concept of passkeys
> * Position passkeys as an alternative to passwords and not a replacement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Introduce passkeys when it's relevant to the user.    
* Highlight the benefits of passkeys.
* Use opportunities to build familiarity the concept of passkeys.
* Position passkeys as an alternative to passwords and not a replacement.
```
